<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Osage Traditions by J. Owen Dorsey


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Osage Traditions

Author: J. Owen Dorsey

Release Date: October 4, 2006 [Ebook #19464]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Osage Traditions</title>
      <author>J. Owen Dorsey</author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date value="2006-10-04">October 4, 2006</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">19464</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
          <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
        </bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2006-10-04">October 4, 2006</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>PM for Bureau of American Ethnology,<lb /></name>
        <name>Joshua Hutchinson and<lb /></name>
        <name>The Online Distributed Proofreading Team<lb /></name>
        <name>(This file was produced from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)</name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Posted to Project Gutenberg</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htbp' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w20             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w20             { width: 20% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>

    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <divGen type="titlepage" />
    </div>

<div>
<p>SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION&mdash;BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY.</p>
</div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

    <div>
      <head>Illustrations</head>
      <divGen type="fig" />
    </div>
</front>

<body>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="377" /><anchor id="Pg377" />

<head>OSAGE TRADITIONS.</head>

<p>BY REV. J. OWEN DORSEY.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>INTRODUCTION.</head>

<p>When the author visited the Osage, in the Indian Territory, in
January, 1883, he learned of the existence of a secret society of seven
degrees, in which, it was alleged, the traditions of the people have been
preserved to the present time. Owing to the shortness of his visit,
one month and eleven days, he was unable to gain more than fragmentary
accounts of the society, including parts of two traditions,
from several Osage who had been initiated.</p>

<p>The version of the first tradition was dictated to the author by
Ha<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔüʇse (Red Corn), a halfbreed Osage of the Tsíɔu wactáʞe
gens. He obtained it from Sa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>eki¢e. Ha<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔüʇse was adopted in
childhood by a white man named Matthews, who sent him to a Jesuit
college in Missouri(?) to be educated for the priesthood. But the
boy left the institution after he had been taught to read and write, as
he did not wish to become a priest. He took the name of William P.
Matthews, but among his white associates he is known as Bill Nix.
He has tried several occupations and is now an Indian doctor. The
author was inclined at first to underrate Mr. Matthews's accomplishments
and stock of information, but subsequently changed his
opinion of him, as he obtained much that agreed with what had been
furnished by members of other tribes in former years. Besides, the
author obtained partial accounts of similar traditions from other
Osage, who used the same chant which Ha<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔüʇse had sung. None
of the younger Osage men knew about these matters and the author
was urged not to speak to them on this subject. He observed that
several of the elder men, members of the secret order in which these
traditions are preserved, had parts of the accompanying symbolic
chart (Fig. 389) tattooed on their throats and chests. This chart is
a fac simile of one that was drawn for the author by Ha<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔüʇse. At
the top we see a tree near a river. The tree is a cedar, called the tree
of life. It has six roots, three on each side. Nothing is said about
this tree till the speaker nearly reaches the end of the tradition. Then<pb n="378" /><anchor id="Pg378" />
follows the "ceremony of the cedar." The tree is described very minutely.
Then follows a similar account of the river and its branches.</p>

<figure url="images/image01.png" rend="w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 389. Symbolic chart of the Osage.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 389. Symbolic chart of the Osage.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>Just under the river, at the left, we see a large star, the Red or
Morning Star. Next are six stars, Ta¢a<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>. The Omaha know a
similar group, which they call "Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa si ʇañga," or "Large foot of
a goose." Next is the Evening Star; and last comes the small star,
"Mikak'ĕ-ɔiñʞa." Beneath these four we see the seven stars, or
Pleiades (Mikak'ĕ u<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>átse pé¢ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a, the Seven Gentes of Stars), between
the Moon (on the left) and the Sun (on the right). Beneath these
are the peace pipe (on the left) and the hatchet (on the right). A
bird is seen hovering over the four upper worlds. These worlds are
represented by four parallel horizontal lines, each of which, except
the lowest one, is supported by two pillars. The lowest world rests
on a red oak tree.</p>

<p>The journey of the people began at a point below the lowest upper
world, on the left side of the chart. Then the people had neither human
bodies nor souls, though they existed in some unknown manner.<pb n="379" /><anchor id="Pg379" />
They ascended from the lowest upper world, on the left, to the highest.
There they obtained human souls in the bodies of birds, according
to Sa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>eki¢e. ʞahiʞe-waʇayiñʞa said that there they met a male
red bird, to whom they appealed for aid. (See p. 383, line 18.) This
was distinct from the female Red Bird, who gave them human
bodies. They descended to the first world, and from that they traveled
until they alighted on the red oak tree. (See p. 383, line 30.)
The ground was covered with grass and other kinds of vegetation.
Then the paths of the people separated: some marched on the left,
being the peace gentes that could not take life; they subsisted on
roots &amp;c.; while those on the right killed animals. By and by the
gentes exchanged commodities.</p>

<p>The small figures on the left, in going from the tree (on the right
when facing the tree), show the heavenly bodies or beings to whom
the Black Bear went for help, and those on the right, in going from
the tree (on the left when facing the top of the chart), show similar
bodies or beings to whom the Waɔaɔe or war gentes applied for assistance.
These are unknown to the members of the Tsíɔu gentes.
After the female red bird gave bodies to the Tsíɔu people, the Black
Bear found seven skins, which were used for tents. Subsequently
the people discovered four kinds of rocks, which were the I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’qĕ sá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e,
or black rock; I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’qĕ tṵhṵ,<note place="foot"><p>The sound of this inverted ṵ, between o and u, as well as the sounds of other
letters used in this article, except that of the inverted ɥ (which is a sound approximating
ch in the German word ich), is to be found on page 206, Third Annual Report
of the Bureau of Ethnology.</p></note> or blue (green?) rock; I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’qĕ ɔüʇse, or red
rock; and I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’qĕ skă, or white rock. Therefore, when a child is named,
four stones are heated for the sweat bath. After finding the rocks,
according to ʞahiʞe-waʇayiñʞa, four buffalo bulls approached the
people, as one of the men was returning to the company. When the
first bull arose after rolling on the ground, an ear of red corn and a
red pumpkin fell from his left hind leg. The leader of the Tsíɔu
wactáʞe noticed them, and asked his younger brother to pick them up
and taste them. The leader of the Bald Eagle subgens did so. Then
the elder brother said: "These will be good for the children to eat.
Their limbs will stretch and increase in strength." When the second
bull arose after rolling, an ear of spotted corn and a spotted pumpkin
dropped from his left hind leg. These, too, were tasted and declared
good for the children. When the third bull arose after rolling, an
ear of dark corn and a dark (black?) pumpkin dropped from his left
hind leg. From the left hind leg of the fourth buffalo dropped an
ear of white corn and a white pumpkin. Therefore, when a child is
named in the Tsíɔu gens (alone?) the head man of that gens (ʞahiʞe-waʇayiñʞa
himself, according to his statement) takes a grain of each
kind of corn and a slice of each variety of pumpkin, which he puts into
the mouth of the infant. Ha<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔüʇse knew that the four kinds of<pb n="380" /><anchor id="Pg380" />
rocks were found, "but he could not say in what part of the tradition
the account belonged. He said that subsequently the Waɔaɔe and
Tsíɔu gentes came to the village of the Hañ'ʞa-utá¢anʇse, a very war-like
people, who then inhabited earth lodges. They subsisted on
animals, and bodies of all kinds lay around their village, making the
air very offensive. The Tsíɔu succeeded at last in making peace
with the Hañ'ʞa-utá¢anʇse. After this followed the part of the account
given to the author by ʞahiʞe-waʇayiñʞa:</p>

<p>"After the council between the Tsíɔu, Waɔaɔe, and Hañ'ʞa-utá¢anʇse,
two old men were sent off to seek a country in which all might
dwell. One of these was a Tsíɔu wactáʞe and the other a Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka-wactáʞe.
Each man received a pipe from the council and was told
to go for seven days without food or drink. He carried a staff to aid
him in walking. Three times a day he wept, in the morning, at noon,
and near sunset. They returned to the people at the end of the seven
days, being very thin. The report of the Tsíɔu man was accepted,
so the Tsíɔu gens is superior to the Panɥka-wactáʞe or Watsetsi. A
Waɔaɔe man acted as crier and told all about the new home of the
nation. All the old men decorated their faces with clay. The next
morning the two old men who had gone in search of the new home
led their respective sides of the nation, who marched in parallel roads.
When they reached the land the policemen ran around in a circle,
just as they do previous to starting to war. The Waɔaɔe man ran
around from right to left and the ¢uqe man from left to right. At
different stations the two old leaders addressed the people. Finally
the men took sharp pointed sticks, which they stuck into the ground,
each one saying 'I wish my lodge to be here.' The next day the
Cuka or messenger of the Tsíɔu old man went to summon the Elk
crier. The latter was ordered to make a proclamation to all the
people, as follows: 'They say that you must remove to-day! Wakanʇa
has made good weather! They say that you must remove today
to a good land!' In those days the Osage used dogs instead of
horses. When the old Tsíɔu man made his speech, he went into details
about every part of a lodge, the fireplace, building materials,
implements, &amp;c. Four sticks were placed in the fireplace, the first
pointing to the west. When this was laid down, the Tsíɔu leader
spoke about the West Wind, and also about a young buffalo bull
(Tseʇu’-ɔiñʞa), repeating the name Wani’e-skă. When the stick
at the north was laid down, he spoke of Tsehe quʇse (gray buffalo
horns) or a buffalo bull. When the stick at the east was laid down
he spoke of Tseʇuʞa tañʞa (a large buffalo bull). On laying down
the fourth stick at the south, he spoke of Tse mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ʞa (a buffalo cow).
At the same time a similar ceremony was performed by the aged
Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka man on the right side of the tribe.<note place="foot"><p>It is probable, however, that the Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka (Ponka) man began with the stick at
the east, as he must use the right hand and foot first.</p></note></p>

<pb n="381" /><anchor id="Pg381" />

<p>"In placing the stick to the east, Taʇse ʞaqpa tsĕ, The East Wind,
and Tahe ca<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, Dark-Horned Deer, were mentioned; to the north,
Taʇse <hi rend="font-weight: bold">P</hi>asa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> tsĕ, The North Wind, and The Deer with gray horns were
mentioned; to the west, Taʇse Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'ha tsĕ, The West Wind, and an
animal which makes a lodge and is with the Tahe pasiʞe were mentioned;
to the south, T]aʇse Ak'a tsĕ, The South Wind, and Ta wañka he
aʞ¢aɔĭ skutañʞa were mentioned."<note place="foot"><p>Meaning uncertain; it may refer to the female or doe.</p></note></p>

<p>ʞahiʞe-waʇayiñʞa gave no further information, as a reported case
of smallpox near the agency led the author to start for the East February
21, 1883. Since then he has learned of the existence of similar
societies among the Kansa and the Ponka, and he suspects that there
were formerly such societies among the Omaha.<note place="foot"><p>See "Omaha Sociology," §§ 14-16, 19, 28, 33, 34, 36, 56, 143, 248-258, and passim,
in Third Annual Report of the Director of the Bureau of Ethnology.</p></note></p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>TRADITIONS OF THE ELDERS.</head>

<p>In presenting the accompanying traditions, the following abbreviations
are used in the interlinear translations:</p>

<p>an., <hi rend="font-style: italic">animate</hi>.<lb />
cv., <hi rend="font-style: italic">curvilinear</hi>.<lb />
du., <hi rend="font-style: italic">dual</hi>.<lb />
in., <hi rend="font-style: italic">inanimate</hi>.<lb />
mv., <hi rend="font-style: italic">moving</hi>.<lb />
ob., <hi rend="font-style: italic">object</hi>.<lb />
pl., <hi rend="font-style: italic">plural</hi>.<lb />
recl., <hi rend="font-style: italic">reclining</hi>.<lb />
sing., <hi rend="font-style: italic">singular</hi>.<lb />
st., <hi rend="font-style: italic">sitting</hi>.<lb />
std., <hi rend="font-style: italic">standing</hi>.<lb />
sub., <hi rend="font-style: italic">subject</hi>.</p>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="UNUn'UcAkE. TSIOU WACTAkE ITAPE." />
<head>UNŬ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'U¢ÁʞE. TSÍOU WACTÁʞE ITÁ<hi rend="font-weight: bold">P</hi>E.</head>

<p>(Tradition of the Tsíɔu wactáʞe gens.)<note place="foot"><p>The literal rendering of the title is "Growth told. Tsíɔu Peacemaker theirs."
This may be translated freely by "Revelations of the elders of the Red Eagle gens."</p></note></p>

<p>1 | Ɔiñʞa | weháʞi¢e<note place="foot"><p>Ɔiñ'ʞa weháʞi¢e, "The first end of the children" or "The beginning of the
race." This reckoning was backward. The Ponka have a similar usage: uhañge, <hi rend="font-style: italic">an
end</hi>; uhañge pahañga tĕ, <hi rend="font-style: italic">the first end</hi> or <hi rend="font-style: italic">beginning</hi>. Ádi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, formed by crasis from
a<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e and i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tau, may refer to the words of the old men who have handed down these
traditions. Tsiká is unintelligible to the younger Osage of the present day. One
man told the author that he thought it meant, "O grandfather," being addressed to
the principal Wakanʇa. He said that it was substituted for another name of that
being.</p></note>: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!<note place="foot"><p>The chorus or refrain at the end of each line is omitted in the free translation,
as it would make confusion. If retained, the first four lines would read thus:</p>

<p>The first of the race: he really said, O grandfather!</p>

<p>He was saying, "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies": he really
said, O grandfather!</p>

<p>"We shall seek bodies for our children": he really said, O grandfather!</p>

<p>"Ho, younger brother! you shall attend to it": he really said, O grandfather!</p></note></p>

<p> | Child | last | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p> | Há, | wisŭñ'ʞa, | ɔiñ'ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ'ʞe, |éʞi añká<note place="foot"><p>Éʞi añká refers to the preceding words, which were those of one of the mythic
speakers. He was an ancestor of the Tsíɔu gens. Here he addressed his younger
brother. At this time the brothers were destitute of human souls and bodies, though
they possessed conscious existence and could talk, as well as move about from place
to place.</p></note>: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p> | Ho | younger brother | child | body | they have none | he saw saying that | he really said | O grandfater!</p>

<pb n="382" /><anchor id="Pg382" />

<p> 3 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | añʞúʞiʇse tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | we shall seek ours | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wisŭñ’ʞa, | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a<note place="foot"><p>See the lowest horizontal line on the left side of the chart.</p></note> | wi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’qtsi | ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | one | to it | came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p> 6 | Ĕʇsíqtsi | níkacíʞa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ<note place="foot"><p>Nikacíʞa-dáɔĭ. Another reading is níkacíʞaqtsi-dáɔĭ: <hi rend="font-style: italic">they were not complete
human beings</hi>.</p></note>: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Just there | they were not human beings | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há | wisŭñ’ʞa! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ'ʞe, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother | child | body | they have none | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | añʞúʞiʇsé tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | we shall seeks ours | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p> 9 | Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ¢ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ĕ'ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | two | to it | came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ĕʇsíqtsi | níkacíʞa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>intaú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Just there | they were not human beings | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wisŭñ’ʞa! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞe, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother | child | body | they have none | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>12 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | añʞúʞiʇsé tatsé: á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | we shall seek ours | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ¢a<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | three | there | came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ĕʇsíqtsi | níkacíʞa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Just there | they were not human beings | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>15 | Há | wisŭñ’ʞa! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞe, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother | child | body | they have none | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | añʞúʞiʇsé tatsé: | ádi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | we shall seek ours | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ʇú<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a |  ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!<note place="foot"><p>A different reading of lines 17 to 25 is as follows:</p>

<p>Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ʇú<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | níkacíʞa¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>Parallel upper worlds | four | they were made human beings | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | é | e¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>Awhile | he said | indeed, he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | é añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>Child | body | they have none | he was saying | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>Há, | wisŭñ’ʞa! | é | e¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>Ho | younger brother! | he said | indeed, he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>Úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tatsé: á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, Tsiká!</p>

<p>Attention | we shall make | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ¢a<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tsí naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>Parallel upper worlds | three | there | they (?) came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>ácĭ | é | e¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | had no bodies | he said | indeed, he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | attention | we shall make | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ¢ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tsí naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | two | there | they (?) came this way and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Translation.</hi></p>

<p>At the fourth upper world they were made human beings.</p>

<p>"Still," said he (the elder brother?), indeed he really said,</p>

<p>"The children have no bodies.</p>

<p>"Ho, younger brother!</p>

<p>"We must give this matter our attention."</p>

<p>They came to the third upper world.</p>

<p>"The children have no bodies."</p>

<p>"Still must we give this our attention," said one.</p>

<p>They came to the second upper world. (From this line on there is no variation
from what has been given above.)</p></note></p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | four | there | came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="383" /><anchor id="Pg383" />

<p>18 | Ĕʇsíqtsi | níkacíʞa é<note place="foot"><p>Here they obtained human souls, though they were in the bodies of birds. See
the bird hovering above the four upper worlds in the chart. Then began the descent
to this earth.</p></note>: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Just there | they were human  beings | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | ɔiñ’ʞa | cuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e ¢añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | child | body | they were without | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | añʞúʞiʇse | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | we seek ours | we shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>21 | Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>i | ĕ’ʇsi tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | three | there came this way and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ | é | e¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | had no bodies | that | indeed, he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wisŭñ’ʞa! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞe, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother | child | body | they have none | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>24 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | añʞúʞiʇse | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | we seek ours | we shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe úsakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ¢ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ĕ’ʇsi tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | two | there came this way and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | kíi¢a-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | they did not find for | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>27 | Há, | wisŭñ’ʞa! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞe, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother | child | body | they have none | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | examination | we shall make | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe usakí<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | wi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’qtsi | ĕ’ʇsi tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Parallel upper worlds | one | there came this way and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>30 | Pü’sühü | wi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | átsi ánaɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Red oak | one | they came to and stood on | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="384" /><anchor id="Pg384" />

<p>31 | Hŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ¢áʞ¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>qtsi  | ĕ’ʇsi | tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: |  á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Day | very good  |  there |   came and stood   | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><note place="foot"><p>Why the Black Bear was called Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> was not explained to the author.</p></note> | ¢é-na: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Crow bone white | he who was mv. in the past | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>33 | ¢útsi naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | é | e¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Came directly to him and stood | he said | indeed, he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wiɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢é:  | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | elder brother! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cáʞe | ʇsüʇsea<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ ¢akcí¢ĕ | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>hni<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’  tatsé<note place="foot"><p>Cáʞe | ʇsüʇsea<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ ¢akcí¢ĕ &amp;c. <hi rend="font-style: italic">You shall take me for your servant</hi>; literally, <hi rend="font-style: italic">You
shall walk, causing me to burn my feet</hi>; that is, <hi rend="font-style: italic">You shall make me go through fire
and water for you</hi>.</p></note>: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Paws | you burn them for me | you shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>36 | Há,  | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>! | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | crow bone white! | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wátse-ʇúka-na<note place="foot"><p>Wátse-ʇúʞa-na.  ʇuʞa shows that the star was regarded as a male <hi rend="font-style: italic">animal</hi>, just
as mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa, in line 43, denotes that the next star was a female <hi rend="font-style: italic">animal</hi>, not a female of
the human race. As they were called "grandfather" and "grandmother," they
were looked upon as supernatural beings or gods. So were all of the heavenly
bodies to whom the Black Bear applied.</p></note> | ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ añká:  | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Male animal who touched a foe in the past | there | he arrived and was standing | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué! | éʞi añká:  | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>39 | Ɔiñ’ʞa |  ɔuíʞa |  wa¢iñ’ʞe añká:  | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | they have none |  he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa |  ɔuíʞa |  miñkcé | ¢an’tse<note place="foot"><p>Ɔiñ’ʞa ɔuíʞa miñkcé ¢an’tse, a phrase that puzzles the writer, who suspects
that an auxiliary verb has been omitted and that the whole should read: "Ɔiñʞa
ɔuiʞa-wikci¢e miñkcé ¢an’tse? ( <hi rend="font-style: italic">Can I give you bodies for the children</hi>?) No! You
must still make attempts to obtain them elsewhere."</p></note>: |  á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | I who sit(?) | apt |   he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá| ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ<note place="foot"><p>Wákanʇá ʞána <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, <hi rend="font-style: italic">I am not the only mysterious one</hi> (apply to some one
of the rest).</p></note>, | éʞi añʞá: |  á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only | I am I-not | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>42 | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it |  he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wátse-mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa-na | ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ añká:  | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Female animal who had touched a foe in the past | there | he arrived and was std. | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | íɥʞué! | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandmother! | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>45 | Ɔiñ’ʞa |  ɔuíʞa |  wa¢iñ’ʞe añká:  | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | they have none |  he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa |  ɔuíʞa |  miñkcé | ¢an’tse: |  á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | I who sit | apt |   he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="385" /><anchor id="Pg385" />

<p>47 | Wákanʇá | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-mácĭ, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taŭ, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | she was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | wákanʇá | ¢iñkcĕ’ʇsi |  hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | During the day | mysterious one | to the ob. | he arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué | éʞi añká | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>51 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | wítsiʞué | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |they have none | grandfather! | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | miñkcé | ¢an’tse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |I who sit | apt | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that |I am I-not | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>54 | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckítá | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá | ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | ¢iñkcí | ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | night | the st. ob. | there | he arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>57 | Ɔiñʞa | cuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | wítsiʞué | eʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |they have none | grandfather! | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | miñkcé | ¢an’tse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |I who sit | apt | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>60 | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Mikák'ĕ | pé¢ú<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a<note place="foot"><p>Mikák'ĕ pé¢ŭ<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a, sometimes called "Mikák'ĕ u<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>átse pé¢ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a," the Seven Gentes
of Stars. Could this have any connection with the use of the number 7 as the
number of the Tsiɔu, Waɔaɔe, and Hañʞa gentes?</p></note> | ¢iñkcí | ĕ’ʇsi |  tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Star | seven | the cv. ob. | to it | he came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>63 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | wítsiʞué | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |they have none | grandfathers! | she was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | miñkcé | ¢an’tse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |I who sit | apt | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>66 | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="386" /><anchor id="Pg386" />

<p>67 | Tá | ¢a<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ¢iñkcĕ’ʇsi | tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Deer | three | to the st. an. object | he came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>69 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | wítsiʞué | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |they have none | grandfather | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | miñkcé | ¢an’tse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |I who | apt | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>72 | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Mikák'ĕ | tañ’ʞa | ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | ¢iñkci’ | ĕ’ʇsi |  tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Star | large | during the day | the st. ob. | there | he came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué! | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>75 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | wítsiʞué | éʞi añká | e: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |they have none | grandfather | he was saying that | that| he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | miñkcé | ¢an’tse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | I who | apt | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>78 | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Mikák'ĕ | ɔiñ’ʞa | ¢iñkci’ | ĕ’ʇsi | tsí naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Star | small | the st. an. ob. | there | he came and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué! | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>81 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | wítsiʞué | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |they have none | grandfather | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | miñkcé | ¢an’tse: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body | I who | apt | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wákanʇá | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>84 | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Waɔiñ’ʞa | ɔü’ʇse | ¢e-ná | tsíhe | uʞíʞ¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> qtsi ¢iñkcé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Bird | red | the one mv. in the past | nest | she was sitting in her own | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | There | he arrived and was standing | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>87 | Há, | iɥʞú! | é añká:  | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandmother! | he was saying | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="387" /><anchor id="Pg387" />

<p>88 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | éʞi añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!<note place="foot"><p>ʞahiʞe-waʇayiñʞa, of this gens, gave the following as another reading:</p>

<p>Ɔiñ’ʞa | níkacíʞa | ¢iñʞé-eʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’, | cu<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢é | e¢aú, | wítsiʞué! | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>Child | human beings | none as | I go to you | indeed | O grandfather! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Translation</hi>.</p>

<p>As the children are not human beings, I go to you, O grandfather!</p></note></p>

<p>   | Child | body | they have none | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa wíʞi¢e | ¢an’tsé, | é ¢iñkcé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | I cause you to have my body | apt | she was saying as she sat | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>90 | Ahü-sáʞi | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | áhü-sáʞi | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Wing hard | that one | child | wing hard | shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Áhü-sáʞi | amá ¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | áhü-sáki | tatsé: á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Wing hard | the other one | child | wing hard | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Taqpü’ | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | taqpü’ | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Crown of the head | that cv. ob. | child | crown of the head | shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>93 | Í¢etsĕ | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | í¢etsĕ | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mouth | that cv. ob. | child | mouth | shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Pé | ¢é¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | pé | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Forehead | this cv. ob. | child | forehead | shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Táhütse | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | táhütse | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Neck | that cv. ob. | child | neck | shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>96 | Wé¢ahni<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | wé¢ahni<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Gullet | that cv. ob. | child | gullet | shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Mañ’ʞe | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | mañ’ʞe | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Chest | that cv. ob. | child | chest | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | ¢ü’we-uq¢úk'a | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | ¢ü’we-uq¢úk'a | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Bowels | that cv. ob. | child | bowels | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>99 | Ɔéʞutañ’ʞa | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔéʞutañ’ʞa | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Thighs | that cv. ob. | child | thighs | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cí¢anʇse | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | cí¢anʇse  | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Knee | that cv. ob. | child | knee | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Náqpü | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | náqpü | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Calf of leg | that cv. ob. | child | calf of leg | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>102| Sí¢eʇse | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | sí¢eʇse | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Heel | that cv. ob. | child | heel | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Sipá | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | sipá | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Toe | that cv. ob. | child | toe | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Sípu-itáxe | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | sípu-itáxe | tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Tip of toe | that cv. ob. | child | tip of toe toe | shall (be) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>105 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | its'é | ¢iñʞĕ’qtsi | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>hni<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>    | Child | cause of death | without any at all | ye shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="388" /><anchor id="Pg388" />

<p>106 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ¢aníkacíʞa |ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>hni<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>    | Children | you are human beings |you shall walk | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>| Ɔiñ’ʞa | únia<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ʞá¢iñkcé | ɔiñ’ʞa | únia<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’wíkci¢ĕ: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>| Child | speech (?) | that |  child | I cause you to speak (?) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>The rest of this tradition was not obtained.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Translation</hi>.</p>

<p>The following translation is arranged in lines to correspond to the
lines in the original text:</p>

<p>1 The first of the race<lb />
  Was saying, "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies.<lb />
3 "We shall seek bodies for our children.<lb />
  "Ho, younger brother! you shall attend to it."<lb />
  They reached one upper world and stood.<lb />
6 There they were not human beings.<lb />
  "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.<lb />
  "We must seek bodies for our children."<lb />
9 They reached the second upper world and stood.<lb />
  There they were not human beings.<lb />
  "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.<lb />
12 "We must seek bodies for our children."<lb />
  They reached the third upper world and stood.<lb />
  There they were not human beings.<lb />
15 "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.<lb />
  "We must seek bodies for our children."<lb />
  They reached the fourth upper world and stood.<lb />
18 There they became human beings.<lb />
  Still, the children were without (human) bodies.<lb />
  "We must continue to seek bodies for our children."<lb />
21 They returned to the third upper world and stood.<lb />
  The children were really without bodies.<lb />
  "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.<lb />
24 "We must continue to seek bodies for our children."<lb />
  They returned to the second upper world and stood.<lb />
  The children did not find bodies for themselves.<lb />
27 "Ho, younger brother! the children have no bodies," he was saying.<lb />
  "We must make an examination awhile longer."<lb />
  They returned to the first upper world and stood.<lb />
30 They came to a red oak and were standing on it.<lb />
  On a very fine day they came hither and stood.<lb />
  Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (the Black Bear), who was then moving,<lb />
33 Came directly to them and stood.<lb />
  "Ho, elder brother!" (said the Black Bear.)<lb />
  "You shall continue to burn my feet for me."<lb />
36 "Ho, Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>!" was he (the Tsiɔu) saying.<lb />
  Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> went to the star Watse-ʇuʞa.<lb />
  "Ho, grandfather!" he was saying.<lb />
39 "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  Watse-ʇuʞa replied, "Can I give the children bodies?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
42 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  Then Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> went to the star Watse-mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ʞa.<lb />
<pb n="389" /><anchor id="Pg389" />
44 "Ho, grandmother!" he said;<lb />
  "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  She replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
48 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  Then he went to the mysterious one of day.<lb />
  "Ho, grandfather!" said he;<lb />
51 "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  Said he, "Can I give the children bodies?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
54 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  Then he went to the mysterious one of night.<lb />
  "Ho, grandfather!" said he;<lb />
57 "The children have no bodies, grandfather!"<lb />
  The Moon replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
60 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  Then he went to the Pleiades, saying,<lb />
  "Ho, grandfathers!<lb />
63 "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  One of these replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
66 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  Then he went to the constellation called Three Deer.<lb />
  "Ho, grandfather," said he;<lb />
69 "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  The latter replied, "Can I give the children bodies?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
72 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  Then he went to the Morning Star, saying,<lb />
  "Ho, grandfather!<lb />
75 "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  The star replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
78 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  Then he went to the Small Star, saying,<lb />
  "Ho, grandfather!<lb />
81 "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  The star replied, "Can I give bodies to the children?<lb />
  "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
84 "You shall attend to it awhile longer."<lb />
  The female Red Bird, who had been moving, was sitting on her nest.<lb />
  To her he came, saying,<lb />
87 "Ho, grandmother!<lb />
  "The children have no bodies."<lb />
  She replied, "I can cause your children to have (human) bodies from my own,<lb />
90 "My left wing shall be a left arm for the children.<lb />
  "My right wing shall be a right arm for them.<lb />
  "My head shall be a head for them.<lb />
93 "My mouth shall be a mouth for them.<lb />
  "My forehead shall be a forehead for them.<lb />
  "My neck shall be a neck for them.<lb />
96 "My throat shall be a throat for them.<lb />
  "My chest shall be a chest for them.<lb />
<pb n="390" /><anchor id="Pg390" />
98 "My bowels shall be bowels for them.<lb />
    "My thighs shall be thighs for them.<lb />
    "My knees shall be knees for them.<lb />
    "The calves of my legs shall be calves of their legs.<lb />
102 "My heels shall be their heels.<lb />
    "My toes shall be their toes.<lb />
    "My claws shall be their toenails.<lb />
105 "You shall continue to exist without any cause of destruction for your race.<lb />
    "Your children shall live as human beings.<lb />
    "The speech (or breath) of children will I bestow on your children."</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="UNUn' UcAkE. QUcAPASAn ITAPE." />
<head>UNŬ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ U¢ÁʞE.  QÜ¢ÁPASA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> ITÁ<hi rend="font-weight: bold">P</hi>E.</head>

<p>(Tradition of the Bald Eagle subgens.)<note place="foot"><p>This fragment of the tradition of the Bald Eagle subgens of the Tsiɔu wactaʞe
gens was told by Pahü-skă, the chief, to Ha<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔüʇse, who related it to the writer on
the following day.</p>

<p>Ha<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔüʇse, told some of the tradition first in English, but on chanting it in Osage
he did not give all; so the former account is now given in these notes: "When the
ancestors of the Bald Eagle people came to this earth they alighted on a sycamore
tree, as all of the surrounding country was under water. This water was dried up
by the ancestors of the Elk people, according to the tradition of the Ṵpqa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> or Elk
gens; but this is disputed by the members of the I<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>ats'ĕ gens, who are Kansa or
Wind people. They say that their ancestors blew on the water, drying it up and
causing the growth of vegetation. As soon as the water was gone the Bald Eagle
people alighted on the ground. Then they met the Black Bear, who offered to become
the servant of the Tsiɔu wactaʞe people. So he was sent to "Watse-ʇuʞa, who
was a red star; then to Watse-mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ʞa, a star near the Morning Star; then to the Sun,
Moon, and Seven Stars. As the people journeyed, the Black Bear said to the Tsiɔu
leader, 'Brother, I see a man's trail. Here is the man.' The stranger said, 'I am
a young Hañʞa. I am fit for work.' So they took him with them. Then they
saw another trail, of which the Black Bear spoke to the Tsíɔu leader. They overtook
the man, who was Hañʞaqtsi or Real Hañʞa. By and by they reached the
village of the Hañʞa uta¢anʇse. They entered the village and made peace with the
inhabitants. Then the leader of the Hañʞa uta¢anʇse said, 'We have some people
come to us, and we will make them our chiefs.' So the two wactaʞe were made
chiefs. The wactaʞe were then sent to search for a land where they might dwell,
as the village of the Hañʞa uta¢anʇse was filthy and offensive on account of the dead
bodies in and around it. This council was the first one of the whole nation. The
two wactaʞe went out as mourners for seven days. The Hañʞa wactaʞe (Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka = Ponka)
came back first, saying, 'I have found a place.' Afterwards the Tsiɔu
wactaʞe returned and reported. The council was held again to decide to which
place they would go. They agreed to settle at the place visited by the Tsiɔu
wactaʞe. Then four standards were made by members of the Waɔaɔe (wanŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
gens, two for each side of the tribe. These were the standards made of mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa ha
(swan or goose skins), and they were carried on the hunting road as well as on the
war path. But the otter skin standards were always retained by the Waɔaɔe gens."</p>

<p>On comparing this version with that of Sa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>eki¢e we notice that in one or the
other a transposition of some parts has been made. In this latter tradition the appeals
to the heavenly bodies and to the Red Bird were made before the journey to
the four revolutions of the upper worlds.</p></note></p>

<p>1 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | níɥk’ăcíʞa | tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>eʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tatsé, | wísŭñʞá:</p>

<p> | Child | human beings | in order that (pl.) | attention | we shall make | younger brother</p>

<p>   | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>| Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | tsi’ naci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>| Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | came and stood | he really said | 0 grandfather!</p>

<p>3 | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>ʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | wakan’ʇa | ¢iñkcéʇsi | hi’naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú,</p>

<p>  | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | during the day | mysterious one | to the st. an, ob. | came and stood | he really said</p>

<p>    | Tsiká!</p>

<p>    | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="391" /><anchor id="Pg391" />

<p>4 | Há, | wítsiʞué! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | éʞi añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>  | Ho | grandfather! |child | body |they have none | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>  | Wakan’ʇa | uɔañ’ʞe | ts'é | watséqi | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | e¢aú: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>  | Mysterious one | road | to die | difficult | I am | indeed | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>6 | Wakan’ʇa | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔi, | éʞiʞíe añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>  | O mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying to him what precedes | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>  | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢acé tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>  | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>  | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’, | cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta, | wisŭñ’ʞa, | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etsé: |á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú,</p>

<p>  | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | awhile longer | my younger brother | attention | we must make | he really said</p>

<p>      | Tsiká!</p>

<p>      | O grandfather!</p>

<p>9 | Watsé-ʇúʞa | ¢iñcí ĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>  | Male animal that touched a foe | the std. to it an. ob. | arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>  | Há, | wítsiʞué! | ɔiñʞa | ɔuíʞa |  wa¢iñʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>  | Ho | grandfather! | child | body | they have none | he was saying that | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>  | Wakan’ʇa | uɔañ’ʞe | ts'é | watséqi | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | e¢aú: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>  | Mysterious one | road | to die | difficult | I am | indeed | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>12 | Wakan’ʇa | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞiʞíe añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying to him what precedes | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢acé tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’, | cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta, | wisuñ’ʞa, | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etsé: |á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú,</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | awhile longer | my younger brother | attention | we must make | he really said</p>

<p>       | Tsiká!</p>

<p>       | O grandfather!</p>

<p>15 | Wá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>aha | ¢iñkcĕ’ʇsi|  hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Bier | to the st. an. ob. | arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | éʞi añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! |child | body |they have none | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wakan’ʇa | uɔañ’ʞe | ts'é | watséqi | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | e¢aú: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | road | to die | difficult | I am | indeed | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>18 | Wakan’ʇa | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞiʞíe añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying to him what precedes | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢acé tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="392" /><anchor id="Pg392" />

<p>20 | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’, | cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta, | wisuñ’ʞa, | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etsé: |á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú,</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | awhile longer | my younger brother | attention | we must make | he really said</p>

<p>      | Tsiká!</p>

<p>      | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | ʇaɥ’pa | ¢iñcĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Circle | to the st. an. ob. | arrived and stood | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñ’ʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | éʞi añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! |child | body |they have none | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wakan’ʇa | uɔañ’ʞe | ts'é | watséqi | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | e¢aú: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | road | to die | difficult | I am | indeed | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>24 | Wakan’ʇa | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞiʞíe añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying to him what precedes | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’, | cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta, | wisuñ’ʞa, | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etsé:</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | awhile longer | my younger brother | attention | we must make</p>

<p>       | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>       | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>27 | Mikák'ĕ | ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ¢iñkcí | é’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Star | by day | the st. an. ob. | at it | arrived and stood | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wítsiʞué! | ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandfather! |child | body |they have none | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Wakan’ʇa | uɔañ’ʞe | ts'é | watséqi | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | e¢aú: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Mysterious one | road | to die | difficult | I am | indeed | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>30 | Wakan’ʇa | ʞána | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-máɔĭ, | éʞiʞíe añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | O mysterious one | that only |I am I-not | he was saying to him what precedes | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ckíta | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e¢a¢é tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Awhile longer | you shall attend to it | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’, | cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta, | wisŭñ’ʞa, | úʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | añʞáxe tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>etsé: |á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú,</p>

<p>   | Káxe-wáhü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | awhile longer | my younger brother | attention | we must make | he really said</p>

<p>       | Tsiká!</p>

<p>       | O grandfather!</p>

<p>33 | Waɔiñʞa | cü’ʇse | ¢iñkcĕ’ʇsi | hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Bird | red| | to the st. an. ob. | arrived and stood | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | iɥʞú! | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | grandmother! | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | wa¢iñʞa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | éʞi añka: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | body |they have none | he was saying that | he really said |O grandfather!</p>

<p>(Here some lines are wanting. See the other version for the appeal
to the Red Bird and her reply. )</p>

<p>36 | Ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | maɔa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | u¢áʞ¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ¢iñkcĕ’ʇsi |  hi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Day | land | good | at the st. an. ob. | arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe | úʞawi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’xe | ʇú<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a } ¢iñkcé ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Upper world | gyration | four | the cv. in. ob. | there | we were people | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="393" /><anchor id="Pg393" />

<p>38 | A<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | ɔuíʞa | añkíi¢a-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | We were people | body | we did not find for ourselves | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe | úʞawi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’xe | wé¢ú<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Upper world | gyration | the second | there | they arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ʞa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | There | we were not human beings | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe | úʞawi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’xe | wé¢a<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Upper world | gyration | the third | there | they arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>42 | Ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>áɔĭ: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | There | we were not human beings | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Máxe | úʞawi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’xe | wéʇu<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Upper world | gyration | the fourth | there | they arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Sycamore | they came and stood (on) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>45 | Maɔa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | utañ’ʞa | ¢iñkcé | ĕ’ʇsi | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tsi’ naɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Harvest time | the | there | they arrived and stood | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wísŭñʞaé! | níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | wi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | siʞ¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e tsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother! | person | one | has left a trail | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wíɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢é! | níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | siʞ¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e tsé: | éca<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i’-na, | níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa</p>

<p>   | Ho | elder brother! | person | has left a trail | you have said | person</p>

<p>     |¢íakqá | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>     | this is he | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>48 | Há, | wíɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢é!<note place="foot"><p>Here is where the two roads begin.</p></note> | Hañ’ʞa | ɔiñ’ʞa | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | e¢aú | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | elder brother! | Hañ’ʞa | young | I am | indeed | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wísŭñʞaé! | níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | wi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | siʞ¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e tsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | younger brother! | person | one | has left a trail | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | wíɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢é! | níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | siʞ¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e tsé: | éca<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i’-na, | níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa</p>

<p>   | Ho | elder brother! | person | has left a trail | you have said | person</p>

<p>     |¢íakqá | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>     | this is he | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>51 | Há, | wíɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢é! | Waɔáɔe | <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | e¢aú | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | elder brother! | Osage | I am | indeed | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Hañ’ʞa | a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Hañ’ʞa | we shall be people | he really said O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | ʇ`u<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | siʞ¢á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e tsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | People | some | left a trail | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>54 | Hañ’ʞa | utá¢anʇse tsí | iɥtá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, | é | e¢aú: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Hañ’ʞa | apart from the rest | lodge | theirs | that | indeed |  he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Há, | níɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | ʇ`ú<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | tsi’ añká | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Ho | persons | some | have come | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Tsíɔu | Wátsetsi | iʇá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | tsi’ añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Tsíɔu | Wátsetsi | also | have come | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>57 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | uwáqta | e¢éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | what is good for them | they decided (?) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<pb n="394" /><anchor id="Pg394" />

<p>58 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | ʞíwatañ’ʞa | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> tatsé, | e¢éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!
</p>

<p>   | Child | being chiefs over them | they two shall walk | they decided (?) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | íts'e ¢iñʞé | ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> tatsé, | e¢éʞi añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | without cause of death | they two shall walk | they decided (?) | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>60 | Ɔiñ’ʞa | uʞístu | ĕ’ʇsí ¢iñʞcé tatsé: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | assembly | there it shall be | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | uníɥk`ăc<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e | maɔa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | u¢áʞiʇse tatsé, | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Child | to become men in | in order that | land | you two shall seek you | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Ɔiñ’ʞa | uníɥk`ăc<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | tá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e-ʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | maɔa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ | ĕʇsi ¢iñkcé | ʞáxe añká:</p>

<p>   | Child | to become men in | in order that | land | it is there | they have made</p>

<p>     | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>     | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>63 | Ɔá<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e<note place="foot"><p>At this point begins the account of the Female Beaver. She was an ancestor of
the Osage, according to a statement published in Long's Expedition to the Rocky
Mountains.</p></note> | mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ʞa | ¢é-na | ĕ’ʇsi | ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>’ha | hí ʞ¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> añká: | á<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>taú, | Tsiká!</p>

<p>   | Beaver | female animal | the mv. an. obs. in the past | there | border | reached and was sitting | he really said | O grandfather!</p>

<p>   | Tsíhe | ɔiñ’ʞa</p>

<p>   | Lodge | small</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Translation.</hi></p>

<p>1 "O younger brother! we must see what can be done to make human beings<lb />
    of the children."<lb />
   The Black Bear came to them and stood.<lb />
 3 He went to the mysterious one of day, saying,<lb />
   "Ho, grandfather! the children have no bodies."<lb />
   He replied, "I have an everlasting road (in which I must keep);<lb />
 6 I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
   You must still seek for help."<lb />
   (On reporting to the leader, the latter said,)<lb />
   "O Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, my younger brother! we must still see what can be done."<lb />
 9 So the Black Bear went to the star "Watse-ʇuʞa, saying,<lb />
   "Ho, grandfather! the children have no bodies."<lb />
   He replied, "I have an everlasting road (in which I must keep);<lb />
12 "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
   "You must still seek for help."<lb />
   (On reporting to the leader, the latter said),<lb />
   "O Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, my younger brother! we must still see what can be done."<lb />
15 So the Black Bear went to the Bowl of the Great Dipper, saying,<lb />
   "O grandfather! the children have no bodies!"<lb />
   He replied, "I have an everlasting road (in which I must keep);<lb />
18 "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
   "You must still seek for help."<lb />
   (On reporting to the leader, the latter said),<lb />
   "O Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, my younger brother! we must still see what can be done."<lb />
21 Then he went to the Seven Stars, saying,<lb />
   "Ho, grandfather! the children have no bodies."<lb />
   He replied, "I have an everlasting road (in which I must keep);<lb />
24 "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
   "You must still seek for help."<lb />
<pb n="395" /><anchor id="Pg395" />
   (On reporting this to the leader, the latter said),<lb />
26 "O Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, my younger brother! we must still see what can be done."<lb />
   So he went to the Morning Star, saying,<lb />
   "Ho, grandfather! the children have no bodies."<lb />
   He replied, "I have an everlasting road (in which I must keep);<lb />
30 "I am not the only mysterious one;<lb />
   "You must still seek for help."<lb />
   (On reporting this to the leader, the latter said),<lb />
   " O Kaxe-wahü-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, my younger brother! we must still see what can be done."<lb />
33 So he went to the Red Bird, who was sitting (on her nest), saying,<lb />
   "Ho, grandmother!<lb />
   The children have no bodies."<lb />
       *       *       *       *       *<lb />
36 They went to the good land of day.<lb />
   In four revolutions or gyrations of the upper worlds, we became human beings.<lb />
   Though we were human beings, we did not find bodies.<lb />
39 They arrived at the second revolution of the upper worlds.<lb />
   There we were not (complete) human beings.<lb />
   They arrived at the third revolution of the upper worlds.<lb />
42 There we were not (complete) human beings.<lb />
   They arrived at the fourth revolution of the upper worlds<lb />
   They stood on a sycamore tree.<lb />
45 They stood there at harvest time.<lb />
   "Ho, younger brother! a man has left a trail."<lb />
   "Ho, elder brother!" said the Black Bear; "you have said that a man has left a trail.<lb />
   "This is the man."<lb />
48 "Ho, elder brother!" (said the stranger) "I am Young Hañʞa."<lb />
   [Tsiɔu.] "Ho, younger brother! a man has left a trail."<lb />
   [Black Bear.] "Ho, elder brother! you have said that a man has left a trail.<lb />
   "This is the man."<lb />
51 "Ho, elder brother!" (said the stranger) "I am Osage.<lb />
   "We shall be Hañʞa people."<lb />
   Some people left a trail.<lb />
54 Those were the lodges of the Hañʞa uta¢anʇse.<lb />
   (The Hañʞa uta¢anʇse leader said)<lb />
   "Ho! some persons have come.<lb />
   "Tsiɔu and Watsetsi have come."<lb />
57 They thought of what was good for the children.<lb />
   They decided that the two should continue as chiefs for the children.<lb />
   They decided that the two should continue without anything that would be fatal to the children. (And they said)<lb />
60 "There shall be an assembly of the children.<lb />
   "You two shall seek a land in which the children may become men."<lb />
   They two arranged for the location of a land in order that the children might become men in it.<lb />
63 The Female Beaver, who had been traveling, came to the confines of the village (of the Hañʞa uta¢anʇse?)<lb />
   (She made?) a small lodge (for herself?).</p>

<p>Good Voice, of the Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> gens, knew the history of the Female
Beaver, but he failed to keep his promise to dictate it to the author.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<pb n="396" /><anchor id="Pg396" />
<head>CONCLUDING REMARKS.</head>

<p>An Osage said to the author: "We do not believe that our ancestors
were really animals, birds, &amp;c., as told in the traditions. These
things are only wa-wi’-ku-ska’-ye [symbols] of something higher."
On saying this he pointed to the sky.</p>

<p>Apart from such traditions or myths, it is found that even the
taboos and the names of the gentes, subgentes, phratries, and persons
are objects of mysterious reverence among many, if not all, of the
Siouan tribes. Such names are never used in ordinary conversation.
This is especially the case in tribes where the secret society continues in
all its power, as among the Osage, the Ponka, and the Kansa. When
the author was questioning these Indians he was obliged to proceed
very cautiously in order to obtain information of this character, which
was not communicated till they learned about his acquaintance with
some of the myths. When several Dakota delegations visited Washington
he called on them and had little trouble in learning the names of
their gentes, their order in the camping circle, &amp;c., provided the interpreters
were absent. During his visit to the Omaha, from 1878
to 1880, he did not find them very reticent in furnishing him with
such information, though he was generally referred to the principal
chief of each gens as the best authority for the names in his own
division. But he found it very difficult to induce any of them to
admit that the gentes had subdivisions, which were probably the
original gentes. It was not till 1880, and after questioning many,
that by the merest accident he obtained the clew from the keeper of
a sacred pipe.</p>

<p>The Iowa, who have these social divisions and personal names of
mythic significance, also have sacred songs, but these are in the Winnebago
language. It is probable that they are the property of a
secret order, as they, too, show how some of the gentes descended as
birds from the upper world. The names of the Winnebago gentes
and of some members of the tribe have been recorded by the author,
who has also learned parts of their traditions. He infers that their
secret society has not been abolished.</p>

<p>When a man of the Kansa tribe observed that the author had an
inkling of the matter he related part of the tradition of that tribe,
explaining the origin of the names and the taboos of several Kansa
gentes. The ancestors of these gentes were spoken of as birds which
descended from an upper world. The phratries in that tribe, the
"Wa-yŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-’dŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>," or "(Those who) sing together," refer to mystic
songs and strengthen the view that the secret society exists among
these Indians. Several members of the tribe have positively stated
its existence.</p>

<p>As one phratry is composed of the two gentes, Large and Small<pb n="397" /><anchor id="Pg397" />
Hañka, that have the sole right to sing the war songs, time may
show that these songs, which, with their chart of pictographs<note place="foot"><p>See the author's paper in the American Naturalist for 1885, entitled "Kansas
mourning and war customs," with which was published part of the chart mentioned
above.</p></note>, are
used by the Osage, are substantially those of the seventh degree in
the Osage society. This is rendered the more probable by the fact
that the Kansa have grouped their gentes in seven phratries, just
the number of the degrees in the society. And this arrangement by
sevens is the rule among Osage, Kansa, Ponka, Omaha, and Dakota,
though there are apparent exceptions.</p>

<p>Further investigation may tend to confirm the supposition that in
any tribe which has mythic names for its members and its social divisions
(as among the Osage, Kansa, Quapaw, Omaha, Ponka, Iowa,
Oto, Missouri, Tutelo, and Winnebago), or in one which has mythic
names only for its members and local or other names for its social
divisions (as among the Dakota, Assiniboin, Mandan, Hidatsa, and
Crow), there are now or there have been secret societies or "The
Mysteries."</p>
</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
<div>
<pgIf output="pdf">
  <then>
      <div>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </then>
  <else>
      <div>
        <head>Footnotes</head>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </else>
</pgIf>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>

</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19464-tei.tei or 19464-tei.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/4/6/19464/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
